Add Scalafmt Cookbook (#2903)
VirtusLab/scala-cli: website/docs/cookbooks/introduction/formatting.md

---
title: Formatting
sidebar_position: 5
---

import {ChainedSnippets} from "../../../src/components/MarkdownComponents.js";

> Scala CLI also lets you format your code using [Scalafmt](https://scalameta.org/scalafmt/) formatter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Scala CLI also lets you format your code using the [Scalafmt](https://scalameta.org/scalafmt/) formatter.
```

## Basic usage

> This section describes how to use Scala CLI to format your code using default rules. For advance usage and all availible flags, please see next section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section describes how to use Scala CLI to format your code using default rules. For advanced usage and all available flags, please see next section.
```

### Check

To check the format of all your sources in the current directory:
```bash
scala-cli fmt --check .
```

This command will check if the code is formatted correctly according to the default rules.
If it is not, it will return a diff of the changes that need to be made to match formatting rules.

### Format

If you want to format all your code, you can use the following command:
```bash
scala-cli fmt .
```
This command will format all your sources in the current directory according to the default rules.

### Example

Let's take a simple `HelloWorld` application:
```scala title=HelloWorld.scala
// use scala 3.3.0
@main def hello()={println("Hello, World!")}
def someLongMethodMoreThan80Characters():Unit={println("This is a long method")
println("Another print here?")}
```

You can notice that this implementations is written with long lines, no indentation, no spaces and no new lines.
It is hard to distinguish where one statement ends and another begins, which makes it hard to read.

<ChainedSnippets>

Let's check the format of this code:

> ```bash
> scala-cli fmt --check .
> ```

Reviewer: the `docs-tests` CI job seems to be failing on this snippet... you're likely expecting the `--check` to fail here, so perhaps you need to add the `fail` keyword:
````suggestion
```bash fail
scala-cli fmt --check .
```
````
to check locally, try running:
```bash
./mill -i 'docs-tests[]'.test 'sclicheck.DocTests.cookbook introduction/formatting'
```

Here is the output:
```diff
--- a/private/tmp/formatting-example/FormattingExample.scala
+++ b/private/tmp/formatting-example/FormattingExample.scala
@@ -1,4 +1,7 @@
 // use scala 3.3.0
-@main def hello()={println("Hello, World!")}
-def someLongMethodMoreThan80Characters():Unit={println("This is a long method")
-println("Another print here?")}
+@main def hello() = { println("Hello, World!") }
+def someLongMethodMoreThan80Characters(): Unit = {
+  println("This is a long method")
+  println("Another print here?")
+}
+
error: --test failed
```
</ChainedSnippets>

> As we can see, the code is not formatted by default rules. And [Scalafmt](https://scalameta.org/scalafmt/) formatter provides a diff of the changes that need to be made to match formatting rules.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we can see, the code is not correctly formatted according to the default rules and [Scalafmt](https://scalameta.org/scalafmt/) formatter provides a diff of the changes that need to be made to match them.
```

<ChainedSnippets>

> To apply suggested changes to our code, we can run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To apply the suggested changes to our code, we can run:
```

```bash
scala-cli fmt .
```
And there will be no output, which means that the formatting was successful. Let's see the code after formatting:

```scala title=HelloWorld.scala
// use scala 3.3.0
@main def hello() = { println("Hello, World!") }
def someLongMethodMoreThan80Characters(): Unit = {
  println("This is a long method")
  println("Another print here?")
}
```
</ChainedSnippets>

Now the code is formatted according to the default rules.

<ChainedSnippets>
Let's check it again:

```bash
scala-cli fmt --check .
```

And now we seee `All files are formatted with scalafmt :)` message, which means that the code is formatted correctly.

</ChainedSnippets>

---

## Advanced usage

> This section describes how to use Scala CLI to format your code using custom parameters and `.scalafmt.conf` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section describes how to use Scala CLI to format your code using custom parameters and the `.scalafmt.conf` file.
```

### Default 

> By default, Scala CLI creates a `.scalafmt.conf` file in the `.scala-build/.scalafmt.conf` directory with default rules. The default rules are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, Scala CLI creates a `.scalafmt.conf` file in the `.scala-build/.scalafmt.conf` directory with default rules. The default rules in this case are:
```

```hocon
version = 3.7.12
runner.dialect = scala3
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

:::note
The default version of `scalafmt` is linked to the Scala CLI version you are using. In case you want to use a different version, you can override it with the `--fmt-version` option. The defaults might also change after doing a Scala CLI version update.
:::
```

### Custom config

The custom configuration will be used if the `.scalafmt.conf` file is present in the root directory of the project. 

> So you can create a `.scalafmt.conf` file in the root directory of your project with desired Scalafmt configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can create a `.scalafmt.conf` file in the root directory of your project with the desired `Scalafmt` configuration.
```

```

You can notice that this implementations is written with long lines, no indentation, no spaces and no new lines.
It is hard to distinguish where one statement ends and another begins, which makes it hard to read.

<ChainedSnippets>

Let's check the format of this code:
```bash fail
scala-cli fmt --check .
```
Here is the output:
```diff
--- a/private/tmp/formatting-example/FormattingExample.scala
+++ b/private/tmp/formatting-example/FormattingExample.scala
@@ -1,4 +1,7 @@
 // use scala 3.3.0
-@main def hello()={println("Hello, World!")}
-def someLongMethodMoreThan80Characters():Unit={println("This is a long method")
-println("Another print here?")}
+@main def hello() = { println("Hello, World!") }
+def someLongMethodMoreThan80Characters(): Unit = {
+  println("This is a long method")
+  println("Another print here?")
+}
+
error: --test failed
```
</ChainedSnippets>

As we can see, the code is not correctly formatted according to the default rules and [Scalafmt](https://scalameta.org/scalafmt/) formatter provides a diff of the changes that need to be made to match them.

<ChainedSnippets>
To apply the suggested changes to our code, we can run:

```bash
scala-cli fmt .

> ```

Reviewer: it seems `docs-tests` is still failing locally on this snippet.
pls try running the suite locally.

Author: The command:
```bash
mill -i 'docs-tests[]'.test 'sclicheck.DocTests.cookbook introduction/formatting'
```
passes locally, I will push, and if the CI is red again, I will look into it deeper.

Reviewer: yeah, this is weird.
I ran it locally myself and it's passing for me.
I pushed a commit ignoring the failing snippet, let's see how the CI behaves. 
I'll try to help you to get it to pass.

Reviewer: right. I believe the `.` is catching some extra files on the CI, which makes it fail.
I narrowed it down to the example file, I'm thinking this should do the trick.

Author: Yes, that is a good assumption, thank you! I have read a lot of logs and [here](https://github.com/VirtusLab/scala-cli/actions/runs/9094838686/job/24996765911?pr=2903#step:6:2244) it can see no file at all. And I don't understand fully why 😅 . Also, the narrowing leads to the change in the examples which some may find unintuitive. I also cannot reproduce the test in the general case on `main`. I use:

```bash
mill -i 'docs-tests[]'.test
```

And I receive: 

```
==> X sclicheck.GifTests.universal_tool  26.262s os.SubprocessException: Result of docker…: 1

    at os.SubprocessException$.apply(Model.scala:211)
    at os.proc.call(ProcessOps.scala:951 targets failed
docs-tests[3.3.3].test.test 4 tests failed:
  sclicheck.DocTests.root release_notes sclicheck.DocTests.root release_notes
  sclicheck.DocTests.command run sclicheck.DocTests.command run
  sclicheck.DocTests.command test sclicheck.DocTests.command test
  sclicheck.GifTests.universal_tool sclicheck.GifTests.universal_tool
```

I will try to reset scopes or modify the name of the file to pass the tests.

Author: I've adjusted the file's name and scopes, and it appears to be functioning properly now.
